\documentclass[12pt]{report}

\usepackage{palatino}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\renewcommand{\baselinestretch}{1.5}

\begin{document}

\title{Alshayun: A mobile education application}
\author{Jacob Chappell}
\date{\today}
\maketitle

\tableofcontents

% Definitions in bold: \textbf{}

\chapter{Introduction}

    \section{What is Alshayun?}

\textbf{Alshayun} is a mobile application for delivering articles consisting of
rich text and interactive \textbf{applet}s to \textbf{reader}s. Written in the
portable \textbf{Ionic} framework, \textbf{Alshayun} is capable of running on
the Web, Android devices, and Apple iOS devices. However, \textbf{Alshayun} has
currently only been tested on a Samsung Galaxy S7 device running Android.

\textbf{Alshayun} is designed with three actors in mind: the \textbf{content
author}, the \textbf{reader}, and the \textbf{developer}. The \textbf{content
author} is anyone who has anything they would like to write about, potentially
making use of interactive and embedded \textbf{applet}s as assistive visual
aids. The \textbf{reader} is anyone who would like to read what one or more
\textbf{content author}s have to say. The \textbf{developer} is the one capable of
developing \textbf{applet}s and other functionality of \textbf{Alshayun} of
which \textbf{content author}s and \textbf{reader}s can make use. Note that
while I speak of these roles in the singular, many individuals may inhabit any
given role, and some individuals may inhabit multiple roles.

    \section{Inspiration}

After taking a numerical methods course as part of my Computer Science
undergraduate degree, I became fascinated with Bézier curves. Whilst researching
Bézier curves online, I came across an article titled \textit{A Primer on Bézier
Curves} \cite{pomax} authored by someone named Pomax. The highly detailed and
enlightening article was filled with interactive \textbf{applet}s designed to
strengthen the \textbf{reader}'s understanding of each progressively difficult
concept.

Intrigued by Pomax's work, I was inspired to develop a sort of content delivery
mechanism designed to allow \textbf{content author}s like Pomax author similar
articles and deliver them to interested \textbf{reader}s. Supporting the
development and use of interesting, interactive \textbf{applet}s was a priority.
I recognized that any such modern application needed to be mobile-friendly, and
so I decided to develop exclusively with mobility in mind.

    \section{About the Name}

\textbf{Alshayun} was originally meant to be tailored towards mathematics
education.  However, during the process of developing the application, I
realized that I had created a much more generalizable platform capable of
servicing any subject and perhaps more. Albeit, I decided to keep the name I
gave the application from the time of its inception---a name which carries with
it certain mathematical connotations.

Algebra (from the Arabic ``al-jabr'') is one of the most powerful mathematical
devices and fields of study, as well as my personal favorite subject of
mathematics. The English-speaking world inherited its written algebraic works
from Latin, which came from Spanish, which came from Arabic. This line of
inheritance spanned many years and involved merchants and trade routes, among
other things. In the original Arabic sources, the word ``al-shayun,'' meaning
``the unknown thing,'' was frequently used to describe the unknown in algebraic
equations. Therefore, I found ``al-shayun'' to be an appropriate name filled
with mathematical historical meaning.

To learn more about how ``al-shayun'' came to be the letter ``x'' used in modern
algebra, check out the article \textit{Why X marks the unknown} by Terry Moore
\cite{moore}.

\chapter{Technologies Used}

    \section{Node.js}

\textbf{Node\@.js (Node)} \cite{nodejs} is a \textbf{JavaScript} runtime
designed mainly to facilitate writing scalable, server-side software in
\textbf{JavaScript}. Before \textbf{Node}, first released in May of 2009, the
idea of writing server-side software in \textbf{JavaScript} was relatively
unknown. Since its conception, \textbf{Node} has received much attention and
both praise and criticism from \textbf{developer}s.

Less than a year after \textbf{Node}'s inception, a package manager was released
in January of 2010 named the \textbf{Node Package Manager (NPM)} \cite{npm}.
\textbf{NPM} has since played a vital role in the development of most
\textbf{JavaScript} software and frameworks and has transcended its original
intent to become a general JavaScript package manager.

While developing \textbf{Alshayun}, I never interacted directly with
\textbf{Node.} However, \textbf{NPM} was a vital part of my development process.
It is for that reason that I mention \textbf{NPM} and \textbf{Node} as a used
technology.

    \section{TypeScript}

\textbf{TypeScript} \cite{typescript} is a superset of \textbf{JavaScript} which
ultimately compiles into \textbf{JavaScript}. \textbf{TypeScript} complements
\textbf{JavaScript} with type safety and true object-oriented programming
constructs such as classes, access modifiers, and inheritance. In
\textbf{TypeScript}, every variable and symbol in general will have a type,
either stated explicitly by the programmer or inferred by the
\textbf{TypeScript} compiler from usage. The \textbf{TypeScript} compiler is
available for installation as an \textbf{NPM} package.

As the programming language of \textbf{Alshayun}, \textbf{TypeScript} has been
extraordinarily useful in development. In particular, the access to
object-oriented programming constructs has allowed me to write clean, modular,
and purpose-driven code.

    \section{Angular}

\textbf{Angular} \cite{angular} is a Web application framework developed by
Google and written in \textbf{TypeScript}.  Relatively new, \textbf{Angular} was
released in September of 2016, although it's based on a rewrite of its older
predecessor, AngularJS. \textbf{Angular} is useful for developing responsive,
single-page Web applications backed by a full suite of development tools to
assist in application development, testing, and deployment. \textbf{Angular} is
available for installation as an \textbf{NPM} package.

The single-page architecture of \textbf{Angular} is accomplished by the backing
Web-server rewriting URLs and redirecting requests to the root index\@.html file
of the \textbf{Angular} application. Angular then uses an internal router module
to load the appropriate page of the application. The application can be fully
loaded up front, or lazily loaded on demand. Lazy loading is recommended for
larger applications to avoid a lengthy initial page load.

One of \textbf{Angular}'s strongest development points is its use of the
\textbf{Model-View-Controller (MVC)} design pattern. \textbf{Angular} provides a
template syntax for easily binding the model (data, variables) to the view
(\textbf{HTML} elements such as forms). Thus, if a variable \texttt{title}
exists and the application has bound it to the heading tag of a page with the
syntax \texttt{<h1>\{\{title\}\}</h1>}, then simply updating the \texttt{title}
variable will automatically result in the heading of the page being updated. The
\textbf{developer} need not worry about the details or be concerned with
updating the view his or herself. Furthermore, interactive actions such as
button clicks can trigger the calling of methods which further update the model.
    
    \section{Ionic}

\textbf{Ionic} \cite{ionic} is a framework for building cross-platform
applications in \textbf{Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)}, \textbf{Cascading
Style Sheets (CSS)}, and \textbf{JavaScript}. \textbf{Ionic} supports developing
an application with a single codebase which deploys to Web, Android, and iOS
devices. As of version 4, the \textbf{Ionic} codebase is divorced of an
underlying \textbf{JavaScript} framework, although \textbf{Angular} is still the
most supported and widely used base for \textbf{Ionic}.

\textbf{Ionic} provides a collection of \textbf{HTML} tags and \textbf{CSS}
which generate components similar to \textbf{Bootstrap} \cite{bootstrap}.
Examples of components include buttons, cards, toasts, modals, and lists.
\textbf{Ionic} components are designed mimic the look and feel of a native
Android or iOS application, complete with built-in gestures and animations.
    
    \section{Cordova}

\textbf{Cordova} \cite{cordova} is an Apache project which provides a uniform
interface for generating device-dependent code for Android and iOS. For example,
\textbf{Cordova} provides a \textbf{JavaScript} interface for interacting with
the built-in camera of mobile devices. Thus, the \textbf{developer} can write
one piece of code for taking pictures and gathering image data, and
\textbf{Cordova} automatically translates that code into the appropriate
programming language and format for desired devices (Java for Android, Swift for
iOS). \textbf{Cordova} is a vital part of \textbf{Ionic}, and \textbf{Ionic}
provides a direct command-line interface to \textbf{Cordova} for building mobile
packages.
    
    \section{Flask}

\textbf{Flask} \cite{flask} is a \textbf{Python} framework for the rapid
development of \textbf{Representational State Transfer (REST)}
\textbf{Application Programming Interface (API)}s. \textbf{Flask} allows
\textbf{developer}s to prefix \textbf{Python} functions with decorators
indicating the URL endpoint which triggers the function, the acceptable HTTP
methods, and more. \textbf{Flask} also provides a collection of helpful methods
for generating HTTP responses, handling exceptions, and easily processing HTTP
request data. A built-in development server is provided for prototyping
purposes.
    
    \section{Singularity}

\textbf{Singularity} \cite{singularity} is a containerization software which
allows users to develop, package, and relocate full-fledged compute environments
consisting of an operating system and software binaries and libraries.
\textbf{Singularity} is one of several containerization platforms in existence.
However, it stands apart by being the most secure and, in my opinion, simplest
to use. I have a personal connection to \textbf{Singularity}, having contributed
code to the open-source project and developed many containers as part of my
employment at the University of Kentucky.

\chapter{Quick n' Dirty Server}

    \section{Building and Running}
    \section{Motivation}
    \section{Backend}
    \section{Frontend}
    \section{Production Considerations}

\chapter{Alshayun}
    \section{Building and Running}
    \section{User Interface}
    \section{Caching Strategy}
    \section{Applets}
    \section{Accepting Contributions}

\chapter{Use Cases}
    \section{Classroom Auxiliary Content}
    \section{Starter Mobile Blog}

\chapter{Future Work}
    \section{User Accounts}
    \section{Cloud Hosting}
    \section{Power Efficiency}

\chapter{Conclusion}
    \section{Learning Outcomes}

\begin{thebibliography}{9}
    \bibitem{angular} Angular. Retrieved from \url{https://angular.io/}.
    \bibitem{bootstrap} Bootstrap. Retrieved from
        \url{https://getbootstrap.com/}.
    \bibitem{cordova} Cordova. Retrieved from \url{https://cordova.apache.org/}.
    \bibitem{flask} Flask. Retrieved from \url{http://flask.pocoo.org/}.
    \bibitem{ionic} Ionic. Retrieved from \url{https://ionicframework.com/}.
    \bibitem{moore} Moore, Terry. \textit{Why X marks the unknown.} Retrieved
        from \url{https://cosmosmagazine.com/mathematics/why-x-marks-unknown-0}.
    \bibitem{nodejs} Node\@.js. Retrieved from \url{https://nodejs.org/en/}.
    \bibitem{npm} Node Package Manager. Retrieved from \url{https://www.npmjs.com/}.
    \bibitem{pomax} Pomax. \textit{A Primer on Bézier Curves.} Retrieved from
        \url{https://pomax.github.io/bezierinfo/}.
    \bibitem{singularity} Singularity. Retrieved from \url{https://www.sylabs.io/singularity/}.
    \bibitem{singularity3inst} Singularity 3\@.0 Installation Guide. Retrieved
        from
        \url{https://www.sylabs.io/guides/3.0/user-guide/installation.html}.
    \bibitem{typescript} TypeScript. Retrieved from
        \url{https://www.typescriptlang.org/}.
\end{thebibliography}

\end{document}
